# *TypeScript*

## 2024-06-21

Updates in [TypeScript 5.5](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/release-notes/typescript-5-5.html)

# Problem Previously to Inferred Type Predicates

They solved an issue where if you defined a function to do something based on value type it will not properly understand what type is expected.

Suppose the following for the example: \
X is such that the supposed value is of type number or boolean as shown in L1. \
The goal/solution is to convert this if statement to a function and ensure the correct type is inferred by typescript with the new rollout.

L1: `const value: number | boolean = X;` \
L2: `console.log(value);` \
L3: `if (typeof value === "boolean") { console.log(value) };` 
#### Converting L3 into the following on L4: 
L4: `function isBoolean(value: unknown) { return typeof value === 'boolean' };` \
The issue with this function is that `value` is understood by typescript as `number | boolean`.

> To *SOLVE* this previously - typescript now added "inference" to understand the typing (its automatic) "Inferred Type Predicates":
> meaning that if you define the function like L4

(in contrast this (L5) is what you had to do previously which was brittle and hard typing) \
L5: `function isBoolean(value: unknown): value is boolean { return typeof value === 'boolean' };`

As you can see in L5 after the parenthesis there is a hard typing as so: ==value is boolean==. \
This will let typescript know that the return type is going to be a boolean. (a hard typed return).

==Thanks to *Typescript 5.5*== we can do the following: \
`function isBoolean(value: unknown) { return typeof value === "boolean" };` \
` if (isBoolean(value)) { console.log(value)  };`
#### it will log boolean and understand that the type of value is boolean the typescript will infer the type predicate from the function body!
###Yay!

### Where is this useful? :)
Suppose you have the following array, function and reducer: \
`const arr = ["hello",0, " world", null, undefined];` \
if you use the map operator you can essentially already know via the infer type predicate. :D Awesome! \

`arr.filter(item => typeof item === "string");`

If you run this [TS Playground Example!](https://www.typescriptlang.org/play/?ts=5.5.2#code/MYewdgzgLgBAhgJwTAvDA2gIgBYFMA2+ImANAAwkyYwDuIC+AJqTGAK6GVtiO4BmASzC5GAXQDcAKHy5YcVPCQA6Qfii4EACgHqAtqgB8MKAE8ADrhB8YO3PpQOq0BEIDmmAJSTQkEDKVErppwSgBWIEKaAOQwUR4e4kA)

You will see that a is of type string[], and it infered based on the function body! super cool!!


##Caveats!! 
Here's a case where it breaks, but atleast we don't have to type explicit simple cases! \
`function isValid (value) { return !!value };` \
`arr.reduce((acc,curitem) => isValid(curitem) === true ? acc+=(curitem) : acc , "" );`